=== PAGE 1 ===
Michael Gruninger NSERC Pin: 103297
1
Commonsense Cobotics
1. Recent Progress
An ontology is a computer-interpretable speciﬁcation that is used by an agent, application,
or other information resource to declare what terms it uses, and what the terms mean.
My
research has focussed on the axiomatization of ontologies as theories in ﬁrst-order logic and the
development of techniques for their design and veriﬁcation.
• Ontologies for the Physical Turing Test
The Physical Turing Test extends the Turing Test by specifying questions that require the
integration of perception, reasoning, and action. My recent research has led to the design
of new ontologies (known as the PRAxIS Ontologies, for Perception, Reasoning, and Action
across Intelligent Systems) in ﬁrst-order logic that can address the Physical Turing Test
by representing objects in the physical world and the activities in which these objects can
possibly participate. Modules within these ontologies include my work on mereotopology
[14], [26], [24], location [1], units of measure [12], and the Process Speciﬁcation Language
ontology [10]. The questions that constitute the Physical Turing Test are the competency
questions for the PRAxIS Ontologies. Furthermore, these ontologies have been integrated
to support reasoning about physical objects, their behaviours (e.g. the ways in which they
can change), and their interactions (e.g. manipulation of solid physical objects).
• Ontology Veriﬁcation and Validation
Ontology veriﬁcation is concerned with the relationship between the intended models of an
ontology and the models of the axiomatization of the ontology. The work in [2] provides the
formal foundations for the semiautomatic veriﬁcation of ontologies via ontology repositories.
Ontology validation is the problem of determining whether the intended models of the
ontology are indeed the correct models for the ontology. The work in [11] supports ontology
validation by eliciting intended models from the user and evaluating these models with
respect to user responses.
• Upper Ontologies
Upper ontologies specify the fundamental categories of entities shared across di↵erent do-
mains (e.g. time, space, process, material objects, location), and which provide ﬁrst-order
axiomatizations of the relations between these entities. The PRAxIS Ontologies have been
integrated to form the upper ontology TUpper [15], which has been published as the Inter-
national Standard ISO 21838-4. Each ontology module within TUpper has been veriﬁed.
• Ontological Analysis of Robotic Task and Motion Planning
My most recent work has addressed the problem of ontological analysis in the context of
robotics: What is the minimal set of ontologies needed to specify reasoning problems within
robotic task and motion planning? For example, the speciﬁcation of robot path planning
requires ontologies for spatiotemporal regions, location, and motion activities [4]. By explic-
itly identifying the relevant ontologies, we can combine automated theorem proving with
existing algorithms. For example, mereotopology ontologies can be used for the automatic
generation of spatial constraints that can prune the search space so that only topologically
feasible paths are explored.


=== PAGE 2 ===
Michael Gruninger NSERC Pin: 103297
2
2. Objectives
Environments that require the collaboration of humans and robots are becoming increasingly
common. Within collaborative robotics (also known as cobotics), there is a need for a shared
understanding of the physical world between human users and robots equipped with computer
vision and machine learning architectures. However, machine learning systems su↵er from hal-
lucinations, bias, and unpredictable behaviour, and consequently face challenges such as limited
explainability and any notion of provable correctness in the face of hallucinations [20].
Fur-
thermore, the performance of machine learning implementations is heavily inﬂuenced by the
ontological presuppositions that are implicit in training data, which can lead to errors. It has
been evident since Winograd’s work with SHRDLU that to achieve e↵ective cobotics, robots and
humans need to be able to reliably perceive and understand the same situations, reason about
them together, and take safe, e↵ective joint actions. This research program will design, evaluate,
and implement new ontologies that support the integration of perception, reasoning, and action
on the part of both humans and robots. in this way, it will provide the foundation for explainable
and provably correct neurosymbolic approaches to robotics.
The research program in this proposal is motivated by the following long-term challenge:
Can we valuate the correctness and completeness of the implementation of systems for percep-
tion and action in robotic tasks with respect to the ontologies that humans use for commonsense
reasoning in those tasks?
To address this challenge, the proposed research program has three primary objectives:
1. evaluation of AI benchmarking datasets (which are used to train and test current imple-
mentations);
2. design and veriﬁcation of new ontologies required to formalize existing benchmarking datasets;
3. speciﬁcation of new benchmarking datasets that can be used for ontology validation.
We cluster these objectives around the three key themes of perception, reasoning, and action.
3. Literature Review
A wide range of datasets exist for benchmarking AI systems, in domains that include visual
question answering (Visual Genome [19], NLVR [23]), image segmentation (ImageNet [8]), object
recognition (ShapeNet [3], PartNet [27]), semantic parsing (Folio [16]), and commonsense reason-
ing (PIQA [6]). However, many of these datasets are riddled with logical and ontological errors.
Since these datasets are manually annotated, there is also a lack of consensus not only about
the semantics of relations that are used in these benchmarks, but even disagreement about what
relations are used in the datasets. Furthermore, there has been no prior attempt to evaluate these
benchmarks by providing any kind of ontological analysis.
Within the Applied Ontology community, there has been considerable e↵ort expended on the
development of so-called upper ontologies, which specify the fundamental categories of entities
shared across di↵erent domains (e.g. time, space, process, material objects, location), and which
provide ﬁrst-order axiomatizations of the relations between these entities. Particular examples of
upper ontologies include BFO [21], DOLCE [7], and TUpper [15], which have all been standardized
as parts of ISO 21838. Although these ontologies have been veriﬁed, there has been no research
done on their validation – are they suﬃcient for axiomatizing speciﬁc domains?


=== PAGE 3 ===
Michael Gruninger NSERC Pin: 103297
3
4. Methodology
The ontologies within this research program will extend upper ontologies; they will be designed
using my widely accepted ontology lifecycle methodology from [17] and [18], together with the
new techniques described in Recent Progress.
All ontologies will be veriﬁed, that is, we will
characterize the models of an ontology up to isomorphism and determine whether or not these
models are equivalent to the intended models of the ontology. We will leverage the semiautomatic
ontology generation techniques of [13] to assist in the design and evaluation of veriﬁed ontologies
axiomatized in ﬁrst-order logic.
Within the ontology design methodology, competency questions serve as semantic require-
ments for the ontologies being designed, and hence can be used for ontology validation. In the
context of this research program, question answering with AI benchmarking datasets will play
the role of competency questions. For example, competency questions for spatial ontologies can
be based on visual question answering tasks with images from the datasets (such as detecting and
localizing instances of objects and relationships among the objects in a scene), while competency
questions for process ontologies can be based on dynamic visual questions (e.g. What changed
between these two images? What activities could possibly have happened to cause the change?).
Finally, we will use existing ontologies to evaluate the AI benchmark datasets; the ontological
analysis of these datasets will make their ontological presuppositions explicit and identify logical
inconsistencies within them. An ontological analysis identiﬁes the relations and classes of objects
that are required to specify the data, characterizes the intended semantics of these relations
implicit within the data, and then designs the ontologies that are needed to axiomatize this
intended semantics.
Theme 1: SHRDLU Redux (Perception)
This theme will focus on benchmarking datasets and ontologies required to address the fol-
lowing research problem about perception:
Given a sequence of annotated images, specify scene description graphs to facilitate
question answering by the robot about what activities possibly occurred and what phys-
ical objects participated in those activities.
Project 1.1: Evaluation of Computer Vision Benchmarking Datasets
The ﬁrst project will use existing spatial ontologies to axiomatize the relations used in scene
description graphs, which constitute the datasets for Visual Genome [19], NLVR [23], ShapeNet
[3], and PartNet [27]. It will also augment the visual datasets and scene description graphs with
the relations that are axiomatized in the spatial ontologies.
Open Research Questions for Evaluation of Vision Benchmarking Datasets
• What mereotopologies are implicit in the parthood decompositions of the ShapeNet and Part-
Net datasets? MASc1
• Do there exist multiple distinct parthood relations each with its own independent axiomati-
zation? MASc2
Project 1.2: Design of Spatial Ontologies for Visual Reasoning Benchmarks
In some cases, there are spatial relations used within scene description graphs for which veriﬁed
axiomatized ontologies do not currently exist.
The second project will axiomatize these new


=== PAGE 4 ===
Michael Gruninger NSERC Pin: 103297
4
spatial ontologies, with visual question answering serving as competency questions for ontology
design and validation.
Open Research Questions for Ontologies in Visual Reasoning Benchmarks
• What are the intended models for spatial ontologies, and what is the role of Euclidean ge-
ometry in the speciﬁcation of these intended models? PhD1
• Which spatial relations are not deﬁnable in Hilbert’s or Tarksi’s axiomatization of geometry
nor any existing mereotopology? PhD2
Theme 2: Robot Meets World (Reasoning)
The second theme will evaluate the benchmarking datasets and ontologies used to support
commonsense reasoning.
While jointly performing a task, will the robot and human make the same commonsense
inferences about the objects that they are manipulating?
Project 2.1: Evaluation of Reasoning Benchmark Problems
This project will evaluate existing benchmarks for commonsense reasoning (Folio [16], Big-
Bench [25], COPA [22]) by identifying the fundamental classes and relations used in the speciﬁ-
cation of the datasets. A focus in these datasets will be semantic parsing, which is the task of
converting a natural language sentence into a logical formula [5]. Existing approaches to semantic
parsing have neglected the role played by ontologies.
Open Research Questions for Evaluation of Reasoning Benchmark Problems
• What implicit assumptions about object identity, persistence, and location are being made
in the benchmark datasets? MAsc3
• Are all temporal relations within natural language deﬁnable by existing time ontologies?
MASc4
Project 2.2: Validation of Upper Ontologies
In this project, we will specify new datasets to evaluate existing ontologies. In particular, the
comparison and evaluation of top-level ontologies such as BFO, DOLCE, TUpper, and GFO will
be supported through question answering from real datasets for commonsense reasoning in the
form of images and natural language scenarios. The application of semantic parsing to translate
such scenarios into sets of axioms that use a given top-level ontology would support more objective
applications of the ontologies.
Open Research Questions for Validation of Upper Ontologies
• Are reiﬁed qualities in upper ontologies such as BFO, DOLCE, and GFO equivalent to
ﬂuents in TUpper for the representation of changing attributes of entities? PhD3
• Is material constitution distinct from parthood? PhD4
Theme 3: RUIns – Robots Understanding Instructions (Action)
The third theme will focus the evaluation of benchmarking datasets and process ontologies
used for reasoning about action:


=== PAGE 5 ===
Michael Gruninger NSERC Pin: 103297
5
Given a set of verbal instructions, specify a process description that formalizes the
instructions for the robot and that supports question answering by the robot about the
instructions.
Project 3.1: Evaluation of Process Benchmarks
This project will evaluate existing benchmark datasets for understanding instructions (Piqa
[6]) by using semantic parsers to translate natural language instructions (for activities such as
assembly maintenance, cooking) to process descriptions speciﬁed in ﬁrst-order logic by the Process
Speciﬁcation Language (PSL) Ontology. Theorem provers will be used to verify that the robot’s
planned actions are consistent with the instructions.
Open Research Questions for Evaluation of Process Benchmarks
• What assumptions about change, causality, and time are implicit within the speciﬁcation of
the datasets? MASc5
Project 3.2: Validation of Process Ontologies
In this project, we will specify ﬁrst-order reasoning problems (entailment or satisﬁability)
that formalize question answering from process descriptions. Such reasoning problems include
temporal projection, process data quality detection, and event recognition. The objective is to
provide a set of semantic requirements which can be used to validate existing process ontologies.
Open Research Questions for Validation of Process Ontolologies
• Can the PSL Ontology axiomatize activity attempts, failure, and prevention? PhD5
• Can activities be classiﬁed with respect to invariants (properties preserved by automor-
phisms) of models of the PSL Ontology? PhD6
5. Impact
Collaboration within robot-human teams requires the ability to perceive, reason, and act
in an integrated, coherent fashion, snd the projects within this proposal support commonsense
reasoning within corobotic systems.
Ontological foundations for AI benchmarks will have an
immediate impact by improving the quality of the datasets used for the training and testing of
the machine learning systems used in robotics. Most importantly, the capability of evaluating
question answering from benchmark datasets should reduce the impact of hallucinations. The
speciﬁc ontologies and automated reasoning techniques developed within this research program
will provide the foundation for explainable and provably current neurosymbolic approaches to
robotics.
In the long-term, there is a critical need to support an open knowledge network with “large
amounts of knowledge about entities, concepts, and relationships in the world” [9]. The ontologies
designed and evaluated in this program will reside in COLORE, which will enable groundbreaking
advances in the development of AI technology that can leverage commonsense knowledge about
the physical world, and support novel testbeds for testing how cobotic systems encounter the
physical world and each other.
