=== PAGE 1 ===
Michael Gruninger NSERC Pin: 103297
1
Ontologies for the Physical Turing Test
1. Recent Progress
An ontology is a computer-interpretable speciﬁcation that is used by an agent, application,
or other information resource to declare what terms it uses, and what the terms mean.
My
research has focussed on the axiomatization of ontologies as theories in ﬁrst-order logic and the
development of techniques for their design and veriﬁcation.
• COLORE (Common Logic Ontology Repository) is an open repository of ﬁrst-order ontolo-
gies that serves as a testbed for ontology evaluation and integration techniques, and that
can support the design, evaluation, and application of ontologies in ﬁrst-order logic [13]. All
ontologies are speciﬁed using Common Logic (ISO 24707-2017), which is a recently stan-
dardized logical language for the speciﬁcation of ﬁrst-order ontologies and knowledge bases.
There are currently 2580 ﬁrst-order ontologies within COLORE (colore.oor.net) which
are organized into hierarchies (sets of ontologies with the same signature).
• New Techniques for Ontology Design
With design by reuse (introduced in [18], [19]), the intended structures are implicitly spec-
iﬁed by treating a new ontology as reducible to a set of existing ontologies in COLORE.
We use these ontologies, together with the translation deﬁnitions, to propose the axiom-
atization of the new ontology. Design of these ontologies is therefore design via deﬁnable
equivalence – any new axioms are entailed by translation deﬁnitions. The axiomatization
is then evaluated using the competency questions for the new ontology.
Design by ontology merging (employed in [2], [12]) uses translation deﬁnitions from ontology
veriﬁcation to propose the axiomatization of the merger of the ontologies. If the veriﬁcation
requires a new ontology in an existing hierarchy in COLORE, then ontology merging will be
equivalent to the axiomatization of new residue subtheories, or the combination of existing
residue theories with existing ontologies. Otherwise, the veriﬁcation leads to the design
of an entirely new hierarchy of theories in COLORE. The technique of ontology transfer
(introduced in [6]) speciﬁes new ontologies in one hierarchy of COLORE by identifying
synonymous ontologies in another hierarchy.
New Generic and Domain Ontologies have been designed and veriﬁed using the previously
discussed ontology design techniques. My work on mereotopology [3], [22] and time [21]
have been incorporated into the upper ontology TUpper [13], which is under review for
international standardization as ISO 21838-4. TUpper includes a new approach to ontologies
for units of measure called FOUnt [12], which won the Distinguished Paper Award at FOIS
2018. Domain speciﬁc ontologies in medicinal chemistry [7] and hydrology [4] have also
been designed.
2. Objectives
The Turing Test was originally proposed as a way of evaluating how well a software system
represents human intelligence, based on natural language conversations. It has recently been
recognized that a di↵erent approach is needed that incorporates capabilities required for general
intelligence [10]. The Physical Turing Test extends the Turing Test by specifying questions that
require the integration of perception, reasoning, and action. In particular, [23] proposes two tracks


=== PAGE 2 ===
Michael Gruninger NSERC Pin: 103297
2
for the Physical Turing Test. The Construction Track focuses on building predeﬁned structures
(such as a tent or modular furniture) given a combination of verbal instructions and images. The
Exploration Track focuses on experiments in building, modifying, and interacting with complex
structures. The research program in this proposal is motivated by the following long-term vision
related to the Construction Track:
Given a set of verbal instructions, together with a sequence of annotated images, an-
swer questions about the activities that can possibly occur during performance of the
instructions and the various objects that participate in these activity occurrences.
To address this long-term vision, the proposed research program has two primary objectives:
• Design new ontologies1 in ﬁrst-order logic that can represent objects in the physical world,
the activities in which these objects can possibly participate, and how to recognize these
objects and the spatial relationships between them within images.
• Integrate the PRAxIS Ontologies to support reasoning about physical objects, their be-
haviours (e.g. the ways in which they can change), and their interactions (e.g. manipulation
of solid physical objects).
3. Literature Review
Very few dynamic representations of space and physical objects have been formalized to the
extent suitable for automated reasoning. With the exception of my previous work on PSL [11],
existing work on process ontologies such as SEM [26] has focused on the use of languages with
limited expressiveness, such as description logics. The weak axiomatizations of an ontology in
these logics allow the existence of unintended models, a problem for automated reasoning insofar
as there will exist sentences that are entailed by all intended models of the ontology but which
are not provable from the axioms. Similarly, existing work in verb semantics (FrameNet [24],
VerbNet [20]) has not been integrated with ﬁrst-order process ontologies.
Spatial reasoning has focussed on the use of qualitative spatial calculi [9] Almost all work on
ﬁrst-order spatial ontologies has been in mereotopology, although recent work has also explored
notions of convexity [16] and betweenness [15].
Several open datasets (ImageNet [8], ShapeNet, [5] and PartNet [27]) have been created to
support object recognition is computer vision. These datasets consist of images and object de-
scriptions that are manually annotated to indicate what objects are depicted. To capture the
commonsense knowledge required to specify scene descriptions, existing approaches to computer
vision and robotics have begun to extend these datasets to include simple knowledge represen-
tation schemes such as ConceptNet [25]. However, none of these approaches can fully specify
the intended semantics of the terminology, nor can they support automated reasoning from the
ontology alone.
4. Methodology
The PRAxIS Ontologies will extend existing generic ﬁrst-order ontologies for time, space,
and processes. Ontologies will be designed and evaluated using my widely accepted ontology
lifecycle methodology from [17], together with the new techniques described in Recent Progress.
1We will refer to these as the PRAxIS Ontologies (for Perception, Reasoning, and Action across Intelligent
Systems).


=== PAGE 3 ===
Michael Gruninger NSERC Pin: 103297
3
All ontologies will be veriﬁed – we characterize the models of an ontology up to isomorphism and
determine whether or not these models are equivalent to the intended models of the ontology.
The questions that constitute the Physical Turing Test will become the competency questions
for the PRAxIS Ontologies.
In particular, ontologies for perception will be tested by visual
question answering; ontologies for action will be tested through the representation of instructions
for assembling, using, repairing, and maintaining physical objects, including devices and everyday
objects such as furniture.
In tackling the research challenges arising from the Construction Task of the Physical Turing
Test, the proposed program focuses on two themes – designing new ontologies from linguistic cues
and designing new ontologies from visual cues. The proposal will provide opportunities for HQP
training through speciﬁc open research questions associated with each project within a theme.
Theme 1: Ontologies from Linguistic Cues
This theme will design and evaluate new process and spatial ontologies together with reasoning
techniques required to address the following research problem:
Given a set of verbal instructions, specify a process description that formalizes the
instructions and that supports question answering about the instructions.
Project 1.1: Domain Process Ontologies
This project will apply the design methodology for domain process ontologies (introduced in
[1]) that uses static domain ontologies to specify dynamic domain ontologies that can deal with
spatial change and object change processes. The project will focus on verbs that intuitively corre-
spond to physical processes (i.e. processes that change physical objects or the relationships among
physical objects). In particular, for each verb that denotes an activity within the instructions, we
1. identify the ﬂuents that are changed when the process corresponding to the verb occurs;
2. axiomatize the domain state ontologies that contain the ﬂuents in their signature;
3. identify the domain ontologies for these domain state ontologies; this may require additional
axiomatizations if such ontologies do not currently exist;
4. axiomatize the domain process ontologies, which classify all possible activities that change
ﬂuents in the signature.
A complete axiomatization of the process underlying a verb will require concepts from the PSL
Ontology: participation, actor performing activities, natural activities, duration, composition of
complex activities, and concurrency.
Open Research Questions for Domain Process Ontologies
• Can a↵ordances be formalized by domain process ontologies through the characterization of
which activities can possibly occur with a given object? (e.g. “Pick up an object that you
can use to cut the tape and open the box.”) PhD1
• Can the PSL Ontology axiomatize activity attempts, failure, and prevention? MASc1


=== PAGE 4 ===
Michael Gruninger NSERC Pin: 103297
4
Project 1.2: Spatial Ontologies
This project will design ontologies related to the spatial prepositions and verbs that denote
spatial states (e.g. contain, support) within the instructions, beginning from existing qualitative
spatial calculi [9]. For each qualitative spatial calculus, we will specify the ﬁrst-order ontology
that axiomatizes the composition table of the calculus (using the technique we employed in [3],
[14]), so that there is a one-to-one correspondence between models of the ontology and the set of
solutions to constraints speciﬁed in the spatial calculus.
Open Research Questions for Spatial Ontologies
• What are the metalogical relationships among existing spatial ontologies? MASc2
• Which classes of lattices, partial orderings, and graphs are needed for the veriﬁcation of
mereologies and mereotopologies? MASc3
• Can deﬁnability be used to determine when new spatial ontologies are required? PhD2
Project 1.3: Reasoning with Process Descriptions
To support question-answering in the Physical Turing Test, this project will also investigate
reasoning with process descriptions as a generalization of problems in reasoning about action,
such as temporal projection and plan existence. The focus will be on the speciﬁcation of new
reasoning problems that formalize the competency questions that are answered by entailment
from process descriptions.
Open Research Questions for Reasoning with Process Descriptions
• Can models constructed from the composition tables of qualitative temporal and spatial calculi
be used to guide resolution with domain speciﬁc process ontologies? MASc4
Theme 2: Ontologies from Visual Cues
The second theme will design and evaluate the ontologies for perception and physical objects.
Given a sequence of annotated images, specify scene descriptions to facilitate question
answering about what activities possibly occurred and what physical objects participate
in activities that may occur.
Project 2.1: Physical Object Ontologies
Solid physical objects are self-connected material objects that have a shape with boundaries
and which are located in space [2]. Since each of these concepts is axiomatized by its own ontology,
the physical object ontologies will be designed by ontology merging. The shape ontologies in this
project will be designed by ontology transfer using the wide range of mathematical theories that
axiomatize generalizations of topological manifolds and which already exist in COLORE.
Open Research Questions for Physical Object Ontologies
• Do there exist physical objects (e.g. in PartNet and ShapeNet) whose shapes are not deﬁnable
by shape ontologies that are synonymous with theories of topological manifolds? MASc5
• Does the axiomatization of objects that are rigid (e.g. ceramic cup), nonrigid (e.g. pillow),
and articulated (e.g. hinge) require an ontology of processes and a↵ordances? PhD4
• Do unity and identity criteria for material objects vary across classes of objects? PhD3


=== PAGE 5 ===
Michael Gruninger NSERC Pin: 103297
5
Project 2.2: Ontologies for Perception
There are two fundamental classes of objects in the ontology of any vision problem – image
and scene – together with a depiction relation between objects in these two classes. This project
will design ontologies for the depiction of physical objects in images and the spatial relations
among objects in the scene that lead to occlusion. The ontologies for perception will be designed
by reuse.
Open Research Questions for Ontologies of Perception
• What spatial relations are needed for axiomatizing scenes containing physical objects? PhD2
• Can objects be recognized by recognition of their possible behaviours? PhD1
• Are the perception and shape ontologies expressive enough to represent the reconstruction of
3D objects from a sequence of images that arise from manipulating an object? PhD5
Project 2.3: Reasoning in Perception and Action
To support the question-answering from scene descriptions, this project will investigate rea-
soning (theorem proving and model construction through constraint satisfaction) with ﬁrst-order
ontologies. For the shape and vision ontologies, the focus will be on model construction. Images,
scenes, and depiction constraints are speciﬁed as modules in the ontology; a scene description
is equivalent to ﬁnding models of the ontology which also satisfy the sentences representing the
image. Since the vision ontologies are reducible, students will explore new techniques for model
construction via amalgamation of the models of each module of the ontology that they desgin.
In the case of the physical object ontologies, students will propose new theorem proving
heuristics that exploit the modularity of the ontologies that they design. In particular, students
will propose techniques that utilize logical properties (consistency, extensions) as well as linguistic
cues and answer hints to identify the speciﬁc ontologies that adequately describe the implied
background knowledge needed to solve a speciﬁc reasoning task.
5. Impact
We expect this research to lead to technologies that address needs in manufacturing. The entire
product lifecycle (conceptual design, detailed design, manufacture, maintenance) involves a wide
range of integrated tasks that focus on the properties of physical objects. PRAxIS Ontologies
and automated reasoning techniques can be applied to problems in intelligent manufacturing,
which can be implemented by software developers into products for automated generative design
of products and process planning. Through the skills acquired in this program, HQP will also be
ideally positioned to solve such real-world industrial problems through the application of formal
techniques.
There is a critical need to support an open knowledge network with “large amounts of knowl-
edge about entities, concepts, and relationships in the world” [10]. The ontologies designed and
evaluated in this program will reside in COLORE, which will enable groundbreaking advances in
the development of AI technology that can leverage commonsense knowledge about the physical
world, and support novel testbeds for testing how intelligent systems (including robotics and
autonomous vehicles) encounter the physical world.
